=======================================================
Python LaTeX -- reStructuredText for Documenting Python
=======================================================


What it does -- Python LaTeX generates LaTeX suitable as input to
the "Documenting Python" system.  This system is described at:

    http://www.python.org/dev/doc/devel/doc/doc.html


Installation
------------

If you have a standard Docutils installation, then you should be
able to go to the parent directory of the ``docutils`` directory,
then do the following::

    unzip rstdocpy-1.0b.zip

This will create (overlay) the following files::

    README_docpy
    Docs/Makefile
    Docs/pythonlatex_intro.txt
    docutils/docs/rst/docpy.html
    docutils/docutils/writers/python_latex.py
    docutils/tools/python_latex.py

In order to use the above files in place, you may have to do
something like::

    export PYTHONPATH=/w1/Python/DocUtils/docutils:$PYTHONPATH

You will also need the "Documenting Python" tools installed.  They
are in the ``Doc`` directory of the Python source code
distribution.


Testing
-------

After the above installation, you should be able to go to the
``Msgs`` directory and convert the document ``docpy_intro.rst``.

First, edit the file ``Msgs/Makefile``.  Change the path that
points to the location where the Python source code is installed.
Then type::

    cd Msgs
    make clean
    make


Documentation
-------------

The file ``Msgs/docpy_intro.rst`` contains an introduction.

See the companion document 'Quick reStructuredText for
"Documenting Python"' (docutils/docs/rst/docpy.html) for
additional mark-up that can be used when generating LaTeX for
"Documenting Python". The first section of this document has
information specific to the generation of LaTeX for Documenting
Python. In addition, that document also adds another column to the
specification tables.  This additional column describes the LaTeX
commands generated by this writer.


More Information
----------------

Find out more about Docutils at::

    http://docutils.sourceforge.net/

More information about the Documenting Python system is at::

    http://www.python.org/dev/doc/devel/doc/doc.html


Acknowledgements
-----------------

Thanks to the Docutils project members for Docutils.  In
particular, thanks to project coordinator David Goodger.

Thanks to Engelbert Gruber for the implementation of the latex
writer.  That implementation formed the starting point for this
writer.  He should get much of the credit for this writer also,
however, any bugs were likely introduced by me.


Contact
-------

Please let me know about suggestions and problems::

    Dave Kuhlman
    dkuhlman@rexx.com
    http://www.rexx.com/~dkuhlman

