.. $Id$

Late last night, or early this morning, an incident occurred at Lower Norwood
which points, it is feared, to a serious crime. Mr. Jonas Oldacre is a well
known resident of that suburb, where he has carried on his business as a
builder for many years. Mr. Oldacre is a bachelor, fifty-two years of age, and
lives in Deep Dene House, at the Sydenham end of the road of that name. He has
had the reputation of being a man of eccentric habits, secretive and retiring.
For some years he has practically withdrawn from the business, in which he is
said to have massed considerable wealth. A small timber-yard still exists,
however, at the back of the house, and last night, about twelve o'clock, an
alarm was given that one of the stacks was on fire. The engines were soon upon
the spot, but the dry wood burned with great fury, and it was impossible to
arrest the conflagration until the stack had been entirely consumed. Up to
this point the incident bore the appearance of an ordinary accident, but fresh
indications seem to point to serious crime. Surprise was expressed at the
absence of the master of the establishment from the scene of the fire, and an
inquiry followed, which showed that he had disappeared from the house. An
examination of his room revealed that the bed had not been slept in, that a
safe which stood in it was open, that a number of important papers were
scattered about the room, and finally, that there were signs of a murderous
struggle, slight traces of blood being found within the room, and an oaken
walking-stick, which also showed stains of blood upon the handle. It is known
that Mr. Jonas Oldacre had received a late visitor in his bedroom upon that
night, and the stick found has been identified as the property of this person,
who is a young London solicitor named John Hector McFarlane, junior partner of
Graham and McFarlane, of 426 Gresham Buildings, E. C. The police believe that
they have evidence in their possession which supplies a very convincing motive
for the crime, and altogether it cannot be doubted that sensational
developments will follow.

-----------

LATER.â€”It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr. John Hector McFarlane has
actually been arrested on the charge of the murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre. It is
at least certain that a warrant has been issued. There have been further and
sinister developments in the investigation at Norwood. Besides the signs of a
struggle in the room of the unfortunate builder it is now known that the
French windows of his bedroom (which is on the ground floor) were found to be
open, that there were marks as if some bulky object had been dragged across to
the wood-pile, and, finally, it is asserted that charred remains have been
found among the charcoal ashes of the fire. The police theory is that a most
sensational crime has been committed, that the victim was clubbed to death in
his own bedroom, his papers rifled, and his dead body dragged across to the
wood-stack, which was then ignited so as to hide all traces of the crime. The
conduct of the criminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands
of Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the clues with
his accustomed energy and sagacity." 

